---
layout: post
title: OS X Notes
---

A collection of power user's notes on how to do things on Mac OS.

# Symlinking to iCloud Drive

The iCloud Drive is located in your user library at `~/Library/Mobile
Documents/com~apple~CloudDocs`.  Though it may not seem like it in Finder,
there is a difference between "alias" files made using Finder and symlinks made
using `ln -s` on the command line. I recommend always using symlinks; most
non-Finder programs don't understand alias files.

# Making Debian install USBs

Debian is distributed as CD images. To make a bootable USB out of them, you'll
first need to convert your image to Apple's "Universal Disk Image Format"
(UDIF) using `hdiutil`:

	hdiutil convert debian-x.x.x-amd64-netinst.iso -format UDRW -o debian.img

Then you can use `dd` to copy that image to your thumb drive (in this case,
`/dev/disk2`; make sure you pick the right one and don't erase your hard
drive!):

	dd if=debian.img.dmg of=/dev/disk2 bs=4m

Note that we set a block size of 4m. The default is 512k, which can lead to a
lot of reads. It will copy to your drive faster if you choose a larger block
size.

You can type Ctrl-T to send SIGINFO to get `dd` to print a status report.

# Secure Your Applications folder

Don't let anything hide out in `/Applications`. Give all the files to the
`root` user and `wheel` group.

	sudo chown -R root:wheel <file>

`wheel` is the BSD "administrator" group -- most of the important stuff in OS X
is owned by the group.

# Installing OpenCV and its Python bindings

OpenCV can be built from source just like on Linux. It's a CMake project, so do
the usual CMake thing:

	tar -xzf opencv-3.3.0.tar.gz
	cd opencv-3.3.0
	mkdir build
	cd build
	cmake ..
	make
	sudo make install

It won't be able to build the Python bindings, but that's okay. Get them off
the PyPI instead:

	pip install opencv-python

Now test whether it works:

	python -c 'import cv2; print "OpenCV {}".format(cv2.__version__)'

# Formatting a thumb drive to ext3

From [Ask Different](https://apple.stackexchange.com/a/234316):

	brew install e2fsprogs
	diskutil list # figure out which partition you want to format
	sudo $(brew --prefix e2fsprogs)/sbin/mkfs.ext3 /dev/your-fav-disk

[`e2fsprogs`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E2fsprogs) is a set of utilities
for handling ext2/3/4 filesystems. It seems they're simply [built from
source](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/blob/master/Formula/e2fsprogs.rb)
by `brew`.
