---
layout: post
title: ZNC on Google Compute Engine
---

[ZNC](https://wiki.znc.in") is an IRC bouncer. It connects to an IRC server on
your behalf, and then you connect to ZNC as if it were that server. Normally,
you can only _join_ and _part_ channels, but ZNC supports a third state:
detached. When a channel is detached, ZNC is still connected to that channel on
your behalf, but your client is disconnected from that channel in ZNC. ZNC will
keep a buffer of all the messages sent, and replay them for you next time you
attach (join).

The other great benefit of ZNC is that it masks your IP address. This is
particularly helpful if certain IRC networks (i.e. Freenode) block VPN IPs.
Connecting using ZNC, the IRC network only sees your ZNC server's IP, and not
the one you use to connect to ZNC. One ZNC server can support many users, so
once you set up your ZNC server you can open it up to your friends, too. The
`partyline` module for ZNC even allows you to create channels that exist only
on your ZNC server.

## Setup
[GCE](https://cloud.google.com/compute/) is Google's IaaS offering. As a new
user, you start with $300 USD of free server credit, plus you can always run
the smallest-sized server 24/7 for free. ZNC is pretty tiny, and latency isn't
really a concern with IRC, so the smallest size is plenty for running a ZNC
server.

I started off by creating a new Debian Stretch VM instance. A quick check
revealed that `apt`'s version of ZNC is out of date by several years, so I
opted to build it myself. I ran across plenty of problems because of this,
since I accidentally built it without SSL support. Here are instructions for
building ZNC from source *with SSL*:

	sudo apt install openssl-dev
	wget https://znc.in/releases/znc-1.6.5.tar.gz
	tar -xvzf znc-1.6.5.tar.gz
	cd znc-1.6.5
	./configure --with-openssl
	make
	sudo make install

Now ZNC should be installed to `/usr/local`. No need to update the `PATH`, just
fire it up:

	znc --makeconf

It will ask you some questions about how you want ZNC configured. I chose to
set it up with SSL on port 9999. Port 6697 is traditionally the port for IRC
over SSL, but ZNC also has a webadmin module that comes enabled by default, and
allows you to do many things that normally require you to stop ZNC, edit the
config files manually, then restart ZNC. Chrome refuses to connect to port 6697
at all (though apparently you can override this behaviour), so port 9999 (which
is also a traditional port for IRC over SSL) is a good stand-in that Chrome has
no issue with.

Now we are almost ready to connect to our ZNC server. One thing remains:
allowing traffic through the firewall to ZNC. Typically, we would do this by
using `iptables`, but running `sudo iptables list` on your GCE instance
will reveal that the default iptables rules simply allow all traffic.  GCE
instead uses its own firewall at a project level, so open up your console to
[`VPC network -> Firewall
rules`](https://console.cloud.google.com/networking/firewalls) and create a new
rule allowing incoming TCP traffic to port 9999. You might as well use the
source filters to only allow your own IP, or a range of IPs you're likely to
connect from.  Outgoing traffic from GCE instances is allowed by default, so
we're done here.

Now steer your browser toward your instance's external IP on port 9999, and you
should see the ZNC web interface. Note that ZNC just creates its own SSL
certificate, so Chrome will give a `NET::ERR_CERT_AUTHORITY_INVALID` warning
you that the site is not secure. This is to be expected; click through to your
web interface. You use the same username and password to log into this web
interface as you do to log into your ZNC server as an IRC user, so it's
important that both use SSL.

## Connecting

Connect to your ZNC server using the username and password you chose. If it's
configured to use SSL, then it will only connect using SSL, and similar if it's
configured to not use SSL. It will just mysteriously time out while connecting
if you have the SSL settings mismatched, so watch out!  It can be helpful to
set a MOTD in the web interface so that you get some indication that you have
properly connected to ZNC.

ZNC can be controlled by users over IRC. This is done by sending
[command](https://wiki.znc.in/Using_commands) messages to the special user
`*status`, or by prefixing the commands with `/znc`. For example, to detach
from channel `#znc`, you can write either of the following:

	/msg *status detach #znc
	/znc detach #znc

ZNC should at this point be connected to the server you specified when you ran
it with the `--makeconf` option. Once you're connected to ZNC, you will
hopefully find that this is the case. If not, then you can use the
`connect</tt> and <tt>jump` commands to get ZNC to connect to a server, or try
the next one in the list (if you gave it more than one server). Note that ZNC
expects all of these servers to be for the same network: for example, you might
tell ZNC that EFNet can be found at `irc.efnet.net`, `irc.mzima.net`, and
`irc.inet.tele.dk`. ZNC will complain if the certificate for a server doesn't
match the server's domain, which will happen if you connect to a domain like
`irc.efnet.net`, which redirects to other EFNet servers. You can either
explicitly trust the certs, or just connect directly to the server you're
redirected to.

